---
title: My Papers &#35;1: Momentum-space lattices
excerpt: Cold atoms in momentum-space lattices
---
Title: Atom-optics simulator of lattice transport phenomena
Link: [arXiv:1601.05785](https://arxiv.org/abs/1601.05785)
Date: Jan 21, 2016

Written at a physics undergrad level?

In the spirit of trying to explain complicated physics nonsense (the point of this site), I'll start with my own work. Over the last few years, me and Eric Meier have written many papers on different models we have simulated with our system: cold atoms in **momentum-space** optical lattices. This is the brainchild of my advisor Bryce Gadway (proposed in a previous work, [arXiv:1601.05818](https://arxiv.org/abs/1601.05818)), and in this first paper we describe the system and show three simple things we did with it.

Normally people work with cold atoms in **real-space** optical lattices: if you shine a laser at a mirror and hold it steady, the reflected light travels back along the same path and makes a standing wave. If the wavelength is tuned close to the energy difference between some internal states of an atom, then the energy levels of the atom are shifted depending on the intensity of the light ("AC Stark effect"). The standing wave then becomes a periodic potential for the atoms. This is a real-space lattice because it's connecting a bunch of potential wells at different positions in "real" space.

But if you wanted to connect two potential wells, you could also just connect two hyperfine levels of the atom, or just any two quantum states.
